---
layout: post
title: The use of models in biology
feature-img: "assets/img/features/sunbeams-through-trees-1551473_edit.jpg"
thumbnail: 
tags: [Models, Theory, Lab, Field, Bias]
---

I had the pleasure of seeing Marlene Zuk presenting what would become this paper as the Edward. O. Wilson Naturalist Award Lecture in 2016. "Models on the Runway: How Do We Make Replicas of the World?" was one of the best talks I've seen because of the presentation style, but mostly because of her synthesis and original ideas on the role of models in ecology and evolution. During the second week I will relatively briefly describe the use of models in science and ecology before we begin using mathematical models to understand how populations change. For those of you that want a more philosophical and broader perspective on the use of models, I highly recommend this paper. It's also not technical, so it'll be a relatively a quick and easy read:

[Link to "Models on the Runway: How Do We Make Replicas of the World?"](https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/697508)

To very briefly summarize the paper, Zuk and Travisano synthesize how we use models generally in science, but specifically in evolutionary biology and ecology. They have a particularly liberal view on models in the sense that they do not restrict models to *only* a mathematical model or *only* a verbal model. They seem to favor Seger and Adler's understanding: "Any formal device that facilitates 'what if' reasoning can be called a model." In this sense, models can be field experiments, lab experiments, thought experiments, or mathematical experiments—so long as one is learning from the abstracted version of the natural world, then that can be considered a model. I personally strongly agree with this viewpoint. They spend time comparing different types of models, and how they all have different strengths. For instance, verbal models can often be "powerful motivators of research," but they lack the precision of, say, a mathematical model. A particularly interesting section of the paper discussed "The Lab, the Field, and Theory." We teach, and often believe ourselves, that the type of work and inferences between the three are often discrete. On the contrary, the lines lab, field, and theory are often very blurry if you consider, as an example, how model biological systems (e.g., flour beetles, mice, fruit flies) are now very different than their sister groups outside of the lab in the field. In as much, it's important to recognize that biological models that become "normal" many time may be over-represented with respect to variety we find in the natural world, which may hinder or—worse—mislead the generation of new knowledge. An example is the use of males for centuries as being representative of all humans! Studying only males both hindered and mislead a significant amount of medical and other biological research. The same could be said about decades of psychological work that has focused on [WEIRD](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/behavioral-and-brain-sciences/article/weirdest-people-in-the-world/BF84F7517D56AFF7B7EB58411A554C17) people (Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic).